Karpathy described dumping papers, screenshots, repos, and articles into a /raw folder, then pointing an LLM at it to produce a wiki with summaries, backlinks, concept maps, and an index file that the model could navigate on its own. No vector embeddings, no fancy retrieval pipeline, just markdown files that compound. The tweet went viral, the follow-up GitHub gist went viral, and suddenly everyone was talking about compiled knowledge as a replacement for retrieval.

My first reaction was interest mixed with mild frustration, because I had been circling similar ideas while working with Claude Code on larger repos and running into the same wall everyone hits: the model re-discovers your codebase from scratch on every session, and the context window fills up long before the model understands the architecture. Karpathy’s framing clicked, but his setup was self-admittedly “a hacky collection of scripts,” and I was not about to stitch together my own wiki compiler from scratch.

Then, 48 hours later, someone actually shipped it.

What Graphify Is (and Isn’t)
A developer named Safi Shamsi released Graphify, an open-source tool that operationalizes the Karpathy pattern for codebases specifically. You point it at any folder, it parses everything inside: code in 19 languages, PDFs, markdown, images including whiteboard photos and diagrams via Claude Vision, and it builds a full knowledge graph with community detection, an interactive HTML visualization, an Obsidian vault with smart backlinks, and a wiki where any agent can start at index.md and navigate without parsing JSON. The install is one line:

pip install graphifyy && graphify install
Then you type /graphify inside Claude Code (or Codex, OpenCode, OpenClaw) and point it at your project directory. What comes out lands in a graphify-out/ folder: graph.html for interactive exploration, GRAPH_REPORT.md highlighting god nodes and surprising connections, graph.json as the persistent queryable graph, and an incremental cache so future updates don't reprocess everything.

What Graphify is not: it is not a RAG system, it is not a vector database, and it is not a chatbot wrapper. It is a compilation step, exactly as Karpathy described, that transforms a messy directory into a structured knowledge artifact that any LLM agent can reason over without reading every file.

The 71.5x Number: Skepticism First, Then the Math
The headline claim is 71.5x fewer tokens per query compared to reading the raw files. That sounded too good, so I looked at how the benchmarks were actually structured.

At small scale (6 Python files modeling an HTTP transport layer), the compression is marginal and somewhat beside the point: those files already fit in a context window, and the real value is structural clarity: you see that Client, AsyncClient, Response, and Request are the god nodes of the project, and you see the community clusters that group related modules together. That is useful, but it is not a 71x improvement.

At 52 files, which is a mixed corpus of code, research papers, and images, the token reduction genuinely hits 71x and change. The repo ships the worked examples with raw inputs and actual outputs so you can verify the numbers yourself, which is the kind of transparency I wish more open-source projects adopted. The reason the compression scales is straightforward: the graph distills everything into nodes, edges, community summaries, and a report that an LLM can traverse in a fraction of the tokens it would take to read the raw content.

This matters most in agentic workflows. If you have multiple agents writing code in parallel, or you are running a long Claude Code session that spans several commits, feeding 52 raw files into context on every turn is wasteful. Feeding a graph report that captures the same structural information in 1/71st of the tokens is a fundamentally different cost profile.

Under the Hood: No Magic, Just Good Engineering
The architecture is refreshingly transparent. Code files go through tree-sitter AST parsing for 19 languages: Python, JavaScript, TypeScript, Go, Rust, Java, C, C++, Ruby, C#, Kotlin, Scala, PHP, Swift, Lua, Zig, PowerShell, Elixir, and Objective-C. This runs entirely locally; no file contents leave your machine for code. Documents and images are routed through your platform’s existing model API for semantic extraction: Claude if you are in Claude Code, GPT-4 if you are in Codex.

NetworkX builds the graph, the Leiden algorithm via graspologic handles community detection, and vis.js renders the interactive visualization. No Neo4j required, no external server, everything runs locally. Every edge in the graph gets tagged with a confidence level: EXTRACTED, INFERRED, or AMBIGUOUS, so you always know what was found in the source material versus what the model guessed from context.

The incremental update system is where the engineering quality shows. The --watch mode runs in a background terminal and keeps the graph current as your codebase changes: code file saves trigger instant AST rebuilds with no LLM call, while document and image changes prompt you to run --update for the semantic re-pass. Git hooks (graphify hook install) rebuild the graph after every commit and every branch switch, and if a rebuild fails the hook exits non-zero so git surfaces the error instead of silently continuing with a stale graph. That last detail sounds minor, but the previous behavior was to exit zero on failure, which meant your graph could go stale without any warning: exactly the kind of silent failure that erodes trust in developer tooling.

What It Looks Like in Practice: Running It on My Own Repo
Reading benchmarks is one thing, so I ran Graphify on a real project to see what the output actually looks like. The repo was a QR code generator I built with Claude Code: 27 files total, a mix of 18 code files across src/, test/, and configs, 4 docs including AGENTS.md, CLAUDE.md, and FLOW.md, and 5 images including UI screenshots, the Towards Deep Learning logo, and a couple of test-fixture PNGs.

The pipeline ran in four stages. First it scanned the folder and categorized everything. Then it parsed all 18 code files with tree-sitter AST locally, no LLM involved, completely free: that pass alone extracted every function, class, import, and call relationship, producing 162 nodes and 240 edges (things like src_main → calls → selectPalette()). Third, it spun up 6 parallel Claude subagents to read the docs and images: this was the LLM part, roughly 193k tokens. The vision agents looked at the UI screenshots and actually understood them as interface elements, connecting "logo dropzone shares data with QR preview panel" and recognizing that "error correction H" in the UI is the rationale behind the decode-verification badge. The doc agent pulled architectural concepts out of AGENTS.md and FLOW.md: things like "Scan Verification Gate," "Darken-and-Retry Loop," and "Yellow Pitfall." Fourth, it merged everything into a single graph: 229 nodes, 296 edges, ran Leiden community detection and found 26 communities, computed god nodes and cross-community bridges, and labeled every edge as EXTRACTED, INFERRED, or AMBIGUOUS.

The interactive graph visualization (below) is what lands in graphify-out/graph.html. You can click any node to see its type, community, source file, degree, and neighbors. The sidebar lists all 26 communities with node counts, and you can toggle them on and off to isolate clusters.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Screenshot from my own repo.
What it left on disk alongside the visualization: graph.json as the queryable graph that graphify query traverses, GRAPH_REPORT.md with the audit report covering god nodes, surprises, and suggested questions, and cache/ plus manifest.json so a later --update only reprocesses files that changed.

But the part that genuinely surprised me was what the graph revealed that was not obvious from just running ls or reading the code. The repo's center of gravity turned out to be color science, not QR encoding: the dense core of the graph is contrast, palette, and color-extraction math, while QR encoding is just two library dependencies sitting at the periphery. src_main, src_palette, and src_verify are the structural hubs, and the scan-verification gate is central to the architecture, which is exactly what AGENTS.md demands but something you would not know without reading both the spec and the implementation side by side. The tests are wired directly into the modules they test rather than floating off to the side, which is good architecture made visible. The AGENTS.md and FLOW.md concepts form their own island: the spec matches the code in meaning, but nothing structurally links the two, and that is where 19 dangling edges went. And the UI screenshots encode product claims like "never leaves your browser" and "error correction H" as graph nodes tied to the UI elements they justify: that is the vision model doing something I would never have thought to do manually.

After the run, it also registered the /graphify skill, so in any future Claude Code session I can run graphify query "why does the download button start disabled?" and get an answer from the graph instead of re-reading the entire repo from scratch. That is the compiled-knowledge idea in action: pay the extraction cost once, query for free afterward.

The Honest Caveats
Graphify is version 0.3.1 and it moves fast, which means you should expect rough edges. The semantic extraction quality depends entirely on your underlying LLM. Claude Vision handles diagrams and whiteboard photos well in my experience, but the quality will vary with other models, and if your project leans heavily on visual documentation, the graph’s accuracy is only as good as the vision model parsing those images.

The 71.5x compression number is corpus-dependent. If your project is ten Python files with a clear README, you probably don’t need a knowledge graph: you need to read the README. The tool shines on medium-to-large repos where the structural complexity exceeds what a developer (or an LLM) can hold in working memory, and where the mix of code, docs, and research papers creates cross-domain connections that are hard to discover by reading files linearly.

Security patches for SSRF and YAML injection in the HTML visualization landed in the most recent release. The project is young, actively maintained, and getting community code reviews, but if you are pointing it at sensitive codebases you should review the security surface yourself rather than assuming it has been hardened at production scale.

And the most important caveat: a knowledge graph tells you what connects to what, but it does not tell you why the architect made a particular trade-off, what constraints shaped the design, or what failed attempts led to the current approach. That context still lives in your team’s heads, in pull request discussions, and in commit messages. Graphify gives you the structural map; the institutional knowledge is still on you.

Why This Matters Beyond the Tool Itself
The broader pattern is what I find most interesting. Karpathy articulated a shift from “tokens spent generating code” to “tokens spent compiling knowledge,” and Graphify is the first credible tool that operationalizes that shift for codebases. The fact that it shipped 48 hours after the original tweet, already has 1,500 stars and a .NET port, and is being installed as a skill across multiple agentic coding platforms tells you that the demand was there waiting for someone to build the supply.

We are moving from “AI reads your code” to “AI understands your codebase,” and those are fundamentally different capabilities. Reading is linear: the model processes files one by one and holds what it can in context. Understanding is structural: the model knows which modules depend on which, where the god nodes are, which communities cluster together, and what the surprising cross-domain connections look like.

Whether Graphify specifically becomes the long-term standard is uncertain, and honestly it would be surprising if the space stayed this simple for long. What seems clear is that the pattern of compiling code into persistent, queryable knowledge representations is here to stay, because the alternative: re-feeding raw files into context on every session, hoping the model remembers what it learned last time: has already hit its ceiling.